Chapter IX   The Thirty-Nine Steps
Chapter X    Various Parties Converging on the Sea




TO
THOMAS ARTHUR NELSON
(LOTHIAN AND BORDER HORSE)


My Dear Tommy,

You and I have long cherished an affection for that elemental type of
tale which Americans call the “dime novel” and which we know as the
“shocker”—the romance where the incidents defy the probabilities, and
march just inside the borders of the possible. During an illness last
winter I exhausted my store of those aids to cheerfulness, and was
driven to write one for myself. This little volume is the result, and I
should like to put your name on it in memory of our long friendship, in
the days when the wildest fictions are so much less improbable than the
facts.

J.B.

Sept. 1915




Chapter I.
The Man Who Died


I returned from the City about three o’clock on that May afternoon
pretty well disgusted with life. I had been three months in the Old
Country, and was fed up with it. If anyone had told me a year ago that
I would have been feeling like that I should have laughed at him; but
there was the fact. The weather made me liverish, the talk of the
ordinary Englishman made me sick. I couldn’t get enough exercise, and
the amusements of London seemed as flat as soda-water that has been
standing in the sun. “Richard Hannay,” I kept telling myself, “you have
got into the wrong ditch, my friend, and you had better climb out.”

It made me bite my lips to think of the plans I had been building up
those last years in Buluwayo. I had got my pile—not one of the big
ones, but good enough for me; and I had figured out all kinds of ways
of enjoying myself. My father had brought me out from Scotland at the
age of six, and I had never been home since; so England was a sort of
Arabian Nights to me, and I counted on stopping there for the rest of
my days.

But from the first I was disappointed with it. In about a week I was
tired of seeing sights, and in less than a month I had had enough of
restaurants and theatres and race-meetings. I had no real pal to go
about with, which probably explains things. Plenty of people invited me
to their houses, but they didn’t seem much interested in me. They would
fling me a question or two about South Africa, and then get on to their
own affairs. A lot of Imperialist ladies asked me to tea to meet
schoolmasters from New Zealand and editors from Vancouver, and that was
the dismalest business of all. Here was I, thirty-seven years old,
sound in wind and limb, with enough money to have a good time, yawning
my head off all day. I had just about settled to clear out and get back
to the veld, for I was the best bored man in the United Kingdom.

That afternoon I had been worrying my brokers about investments to give
my mind something to work on, and on my way home I turned into my
club—rather a pot-house, which took in Colonial members. I had a long
drink, and read the evening papers. They were full of the row in the
Near East, and there was an article about Karolides, the Greek Premier.
I rather fancied the chap. From all accounts he seemed the one big man
in the show; and he played a straight game too, which was more than
could be said for most of them. I gathered that they hated him pretty
blackly in Berlin and Vienna, but that we were going to stick by him,
and one paper said that he was the only barrier between Europe and
Armageddon. I remember wondering if I could get a job in those parts.
It struck me that Albania was the sort of place that might keep a man
from yawning.

About six o’clock I went home, dressed, dined at the Café Royal, and
turned into a music-hall. It was a silly show, all capering women and
monkey-faced men, and I did not stay long. The night was fine and clear
as I walked back to the flat I had hired near Portland Place. The crowd
surged past me on the pavements, busy and chattering, and I envied the
people for having something to do. These shop-girls and clerks and
dandies and policemen had some interest in life that kept them going. I
gave half-a-crown to a beggar because I saw him yawn; he was a
fellow-sufferer. At Oxford Circus I looked up into the spring sky and I
made a vow. I would give the Old Country another day to fit me into
something; if nothing happened, I would take the next boat for the
Cape.

My flat was the first floor in a new block behind Langham Place. There
was a common staircase, with a porter and a liftman at the entrance,
but there was no restaurant or anything of that sort, and each flat was
quite shut off from the others. I hate servants on the premises, so I
had a fellow to look after me who came in by the day. He arrived before
eight o’clock every morning and used to depart at seven, for I never
dined at home.

I was just fitting my key into the door when I noticed a man at my
elbow. I had not seen him approach, and the sudden appearance made me
start. He was a slim man, with a short brown beard and small, gimlety
blue eyes. I recognized him as the occupant of a flat on the top floor,
with whom I had passed the time of day on the stairs.

“Can I speak to you?” he said. “May I come in for a minute?” He was
steadying his voice with an effort, and his hand was pawing my arm.

I got my door open and motioned him in. No sooner was he over the
threshold than he made a dash for my back room, where I used to smoke
and write my letters. Then he bolted back.

“Is the door locked?” he asked feverishly, and he fastened the chain
with his own hand.

“I’m very sorry,” he said humbly. “It’s a mighty liberty, but you
looked the kind of man who would understand. I’ve had you in my mind
all this week when things got troublesome. Say, will you do me a good
turn?”

“I’ll listen to you,” I said. “That’s all I’ll promise.” I was getting
worried by the antics of this nervous little chap.

There was a tray of drinks on a table beside him, from which he filled
himself a stiff whisky-and-soda. He drank it off in three gulps, and
cracked the glass as he set it down.

“Pardon,” he said, “I’m a bit rattled tonight. You see, I happen at
this moment to be dead.”

I sat down in an armchair and lit my pipe.

“What does it feel like?” I asked. I was pretty certain that I had to
deal with a madman.

A smile flickered over his drawn face. “I’m not mad—yet. Say, sir, I’ve
been watching you, and I reckon you’re a cool customer. I reckon, too,
you’re an honest man, and not afraid of playing a bold hand. I’m going
to confide in you. I need help worse than any man ever needed it, and I
want to know if I can count you in.”

“Get on with your yarn,” I said, “and I’ll tell you.”

He seemed to brace himself for a great effort, and then started on the
queerest rigmarole. I didn’t get hold of it at first, and I had to stop
and ask him questions. But here is the gist of it:

He was an American, from Kentucky, and after college, being pretty well
off, he had started out to see the world. He wrote a bit, and acted as
war correspondent for a Chicago paper, and spent a year or two in
South-Eastern Europe. I gathered that he was a fine linguist, and had
got to know pretty well the society in those parts. He spoke familiarly
of many names that I remembered to have seen in the newspapers.

He had played about with politics, he told me, at first for the
interest of them, and then because he couldn’t help himself. I read him
as a sharp, restless fellow, who always wanted to get down to the roots
of things. He got a little further down than he wanted.

I am giving you what he told me as well as I could make it out. Away
behind all the Governments and the armies there was a big subterranean
movement going on, engineered by very dangerous people. He had come on
it by accident; it fascinated him; he went further, and then he got
caught. I gathered that most of the people in it were the sort of
educated anarchists that make revolutions, but that beside them there
were financiers who were playing for money. A clever man can make big
profits on a falling market, and it suited the book of both classes to
set Europe by the ears.

He told me some queer things that explained a lot that had puzzled
me—things that happened in the Balkan War, how one state suddenly came
out on top, why alliances were made and broken, why certain men
disappeared, and where the sinews of war came from. The aim of the
whole conspiracy was to get Russia and Germany at loggerheads.

When I asked why, he said that the anarchist lot thought it would give
them their chance. Everything would be in the melting-pot, and they
looked to see a new world emerge. The capitalists would rake in the
shekels, and make fortunes by buying up wreckage. Capital, he said, had
no conscience and no fatherland. Besides, the Jew was behind it, and
the Jew hated Russia worse than hell.

“Do you wonder?” he cried. “For three hundred years they have been
persecuted, and this is the return match for the _pogroms_. The Jew is
everywhere, but you have to go far down the backstairs to find him.
Take any big Teutonic business concern. If you have dealings with it
the first man you meet is Prince _von und zu_ Something, an elegant
young man who talks Eton-and-Harrow English. But he cuts no ice. If
your business is big, you get behind him and find a prognathous
Westphalian with a retreating brow and the manners of a hog. He is the
German business man that gives your English papers the shakes. But if
you’re on the biggest kind of job and are bound to get to the real
boss, ten to one you are brought up against a little white-faced Jew in
a bath-chair with an eye like a rattlesnake. Yes, sir, he is the man
who is ruling the world just now, and he has his knife in the Empire of
the Tsar, because his aunt was outraged and his father flogged in some
one-horse location on the Volga.”

I could not help saying that his Jew-anarchists seemed to have got left
behind a little.

“Yes and no,” he said. “They won up to a point, but they struck a
bigger thing than money, a thing that couldn’t be bought, the old
elemental fighting instincts of man. If you’re going to be killed you
invent some kind of flag and country to fight for, and if you survive
you get to love the thing. Those foolish devils of soldiers have found
something they care for, and that has upset the pretty plan laid in
Berlin and Vienna. But my friends haven’t played their last card by a
long sight. They’ve gotten the ace up their sleeves, and unless I can
keep alive for a month they are going to play it and win.”

“But I thought you were dead,” I put in.

“_Mors janua vitæ_,” he smiled. (I recognized the quotation: it was
about all the Latin I knew.) “I’m coming to that, but I’ve got to put
you wise about a lot of things first. If you read your newspaper, I
guess you know the name of Constantine Karolides?”

I sat up at that, for I had been reading about him that very afternoon.

“He is the man that has wrecked all their games. He is the one big
brain in the whole show, and he happens also to be an honest man.
Therefore he has been marked down these twelve months past. I found
that out—not that it was difficult, for any fool could guess as much.
But I found out the way they were going to get him, and that knowledge
was deadly. That’s why I have had to decease.”

He had another drink, and I mixed it for him myself, for I was getting
interested in the beggar.

“They can’t get him in his own land, for he has a bodyguard of Epirotes
that would skin their grandmothers. But on the 15th day of June he is
coming to this city. The British Foreign Office has taken to having
international tea-parties, and the biggest of them is due on that date.
Now Karolides is reckoned the principal guest, and if my friends have
their way he will never return to his admiring countrymen.”

“That’s simple enough, anyhow,” I said. “You can warn him and keep him
at home.”

“And play their game?” he asked sharply. “If he does not come they win,
for he’s the only man that can straighten out the tangle. And if his
Government are warned he won’t come, for he does not know how big the
stakes will be on June the 15th.”

“What about the British Government?” I said. “They’re not going to let
their guests be murdered. Tip them the wink, and they’ll take extra
precautions.”

“No good. They might stuff your city with plain-clothes detectives and
double the police and Constantine would still be a doomed man. My
friends are not playing this game for candy. They want a big occasion
for the taking off, with the eyes of all Europe on it. He’ll be
murdered by an Austrian, and there’ll be plenty of evidence to show the
connivance of the big folk in Vienna and Berlin. It will all be an
infernal lie, of course, but the case will look black enough to the
world. I’m not talking hot air, my friend. I happen to know every
detail of the hellish contrivance, and I can tell you it will be the
most finished piece of blackguardism since the Borgias. But it’s not
going to come off if there’s a certain man who knows the wheels of the
business alive right here in London on the 15th day of June. And that
man is going to be your servant, Franklin P. Scudder.”

I was getting to like the little chap. His jaw had shut like a
rat-trap, and there was the fire of battle in his gimlety eyes. If he
was spinning me a yarn he could act up to it.

“Where did you find out this story?” I asked.

“I got the first hint in an inn on the Achensee in Tyrol. That set me
inquiring, and I collected my other clues in a fur-shop in the Galician
quarter of Buda, in a Strangers’ Club in Vienna, and in a little
bookshop off the Racknitzstrasse in Leipsig. I completed my evidence
ten days ago in Paris. I can’t tell you the details now, for it’s
something of a history. When I was quite sure in my own mind I judged
it my business to disappear, and I reached this city by a mighty queer
circuit. I left Paris a dandified young French-American, and I sailed
from Hamburg a Jew diamond merchant. In Norway I was an English student
of Ibsen collecting materials for lectures, but when I left Bergen I
was a cinema-man with special ski films. And I came here from Leith
with a lot of pulp-wood propositions in my pocket to put before the
London newspapers. Till yesterday I thought I had muddied my trail
some, and was feeling pretty happy. Then....”

The recollection seemed to upset him, and he gulped down some more
whisky.

“Then I saw a man standing in the street outside this block. I used to
stay close in my room all day, and only slip out after dark for an hour
or two. I watched him for a bit from my window, and I thought I
recognized him.... He came in and spoke to the porter.... When I came
back from my walk last night I found a card in my letter-box. It bore
the name of the man I want least to meet on God’s earth.”

I think that the look in my companion’s eyes, the sheer naked scare on
his face, completed my conviction of his honesty. My own voice
sharpened a bit as I asked him what he did next.

“I realized that I was bottled as sure as a pickled herring, and that
there was only one way out. I had to die. If my pursuers knew I was
dead they would go to sleep again.”

“How did you manage it?”

“I told the man that valets me that I was feeling pretty bad, and I got
myself up to look like death. That wasn’t difficult, for I’m no slouch
at disguises. Then I got a corpse—you can always get a body in London
if you know where to go for it. I fetched it back in a trunk on the top
of a four-wheeler, and I had to be assisted upstairs to my room. You
see I had to pile up some evidence for the inquest. I went to bed and
got my man to mix me a sleeping-draught, and then told him to clear
out. He wanted to fetch a doctor, but I swore some and said I couldn’t
abide leeches. When I was left alone I started in to fake up that
corpse. He was my size, and I judged had perished from too much
alcohol, so I put some spirits handy about the place. The jaw was the
weak point in the likeness, so I blew it away with a revolver. I
daresay there will be somebody tomorrow to swear to having heard a
shot, but there are no neighbours on my floor, and I guessed I could
risk it. So I left the body in bed dressed up in my pyjamas, with a
revolver lying on the bed-clothes and a considerable mess around. Then
I got into a suit of clothes I had kept waiting for emergencies. I
didn’t dare to shave for fear of leaving tracks, and besides, it wasn’t
any kind of use my trying to get into the streets. I had had you in my
mind all day, and there seemed nothing to do but to make an appeal to
you. I watched from my window till I saw you come home, and then
slipped down the stair to meet you.... There, sir, I guess you know
about as much as me of this business.”

He sat blinking like an owl, fluttering with nerves and yet desperately
determined. By this time I was pretty well convinced that he was going
straight with me. It was the wildest sort of narrative, but I had heard
in my time many steep tales which had turned out to be true, and I had
made a practice of judging the man rather than the story. If he had
wanted to get a location in my flat, and then cut my throat, he would
have pitched a milder yarn.

“Hand me your key,” I said, “and I’ll take a look at the corpse. Excuse
my caution, but I’m bound to verify a bit if I can.”

He shook his head mournfully. “I reckoned you’d ask for that, but I
haven’t got it. It’s on my chain on the dressing-table. I had to leave
it behind, for I couldn’t leave any clues to breed suspicions. The
gentry who are after me are pretty bright-eyed citizens. You’ll have to
take me on trust for the night, and tomorrow you’ll get proof of the
corpse business right enough.”

I thought for an instant or two. “Right. I’ll trust you for the night.
I’ll lock you into this room and keep the key. Just one word, Mr
Scudder. I believe you’re straight, but if so be you are not I should
warn you that I’m a handy man with a gun.”

“Sure,” he said, jumping up with some briskness. “I haven’t the
privilege of your name, sir, but let me tell you that you’re a white
man. I’ll thank you to lend me a razor.”

I took him into my bedroom and turned him loose. In half an hour’s time
a figure came out that I scarcely recognized. Only his gimlety, hungry
eyes were the same. He was shaved clean, his hair was parted in the
middle, and he had cut his eyebrows. Further, he carried himself as if
he had been drilled, and was the very model, even to the brown
complexion, of some British officer who had had a long spell in India.
He had a monocle, too, which he stuck in his eye, and every trace of
the American had gone out of his speech.

“My hat! Mr Scudder—” I stammered.

“Not Mr Scudder,” he corrected; “Captain Theophilus Digby, of the 40th
Gurkhas, presently home on leave. I’ll thank you to remember that,
sir.”

I made him up a bed in my smoking-room and sought my own couch, more
cheerful than I had been for the past month. Things did happen
occasionally, even in this God-forgotten metropolis.

I woke next morning to hear my man, Paddock, making the deuce of a row
at the smoking-room door. Paddock was a fellow I had done a good turn
to out on the Selakwe, and I had inspanned him as my servant as soon as
I got to England. He had about as much gift of the gab as a
hippopotamus, and was not a great hand at valeting, but I knew I could
count on his loyalty.

“Stop that row, Paddock,” I said. “There’s a friend of mine,
Captain—Captain” (I couldn’t remember the name) “dossing down in there.
Get breakfast for two and then come and speak to me.”

I told Paddock a fine story about how my friend was a great swell, with
his nerves pretty bad from overwork, who wanted absolute rest and
stillness. Nobody had got to know he was here, or he would be besieged
by communications from the India Office and the Prime Minister and his
cure would be ruined. I am bound to say Scudder played up splendidly
when he came to breakfast. He fixed Paddock with his eyeglass, just
like a British officer, asked him about the Boer War, and slung out at
me a lot of stuff about imaginary pals. Paddock couldn’t learn to call
me “sir’, but he “sirred’ Scudder as if his life depended on it.

I left him with the newspaper and a box of cigars, and went down to the
City till luncheon. When I got back the liftman had an important face.

“Nawsty business ’ere this morning, sir. Gent in No. 15 been and shot
’isself. They’ve just took ’im to the mortiary. The police are up there
now.”

I ascended to No. 15, and found a couple of bobbies and an inspector
busy making an examination. I asked a few idiotic questions, and they
soon kicked me out. Then I found the man that had valeted Scudder, and
pumped him, but I could see he suspected nothing. He was a whining
fellow with a churchyard face, and half-a-crown went far to console
him.

I attended the inquest next day. A partner of some publishing firm gave
evidence that the deceased had brought him wood-pulp propositions, and
had been, he believed, an agent of an American business. The jury found
it a case of suicide while of unsound mind, and the few effects were
handed over to the American Consul to deal with. I gave Scudder a full
account of the affair, and it interested him greatly. He said he wished
he could have attended the inquest, for he reckoned it would be about
as spicy as to read one’s own obituary notice.

The first two days he stayed with me in that back room he was very
peaceful. He read and smoked a bit, and made a heap of jottings in a
note-book, and every night we had a game of chess, at which he beat me
hollow. I think he was nursing his nerves back to health, for he had
had a pretty trying time. But on the third day I could see he was
beginning to get restless. He fixed up a list of the days till June
15th, and ticked each off with a red pencil, making remarks in
shorthand against them. I would find him sunk in a brown study, with
his sharp eyes abstracted, and after those spells of meditation he was
apt to be very despondent.

Then I could see that he began to get edgy again. He listened for
little noises, and was always asking me if Paddock could be trusted.
Once or twice he got very peevish, and apologized for it. I didn’t
blame him. I made every allowance, for he had taken on a fairly stiff
job.

It was not the safety of his own skin that troubled him, but the
success of the scheme he had planned. That little man was clean grit
all through, without a soft spot in him. One night he was very solemn.

“Say, Hannay,” he said, “I judge I should let you a bit deeper into
this business. I should hate to go out without leaving somebody else to
put up a fight.” And he began to tell me in detail what I had only
heard from him vaguely.

I did not give him very close attention. The fact is, I was more
interested in his own adventures than in his high politics. I reckoned
that Karolides and his affairs were not my business, leaving all that
to him. So a lot that he said slipped clean out of my memory. I
remember that he was very clear that the danger to Karolides would not
begin till he had got to London, and would come from the very highest
quarters, where there would be no thought of suspicion. He mentioned
the name of a woman—Julia Czechenyi—as having something to do with the
danger. She would be the decoy, I gathered, to get Karolides out of the
care of his guards. He talked, too, about a Black Stone and a man that
lisped in his speech, and he described very particularly somebody that
he never referred to without a shudder—an old man with a young voice
who could hood his eyes like a hawk.

He spoke a good deal about death, too. He was mortally anxious about
winning through with his job, but he didn’t care a rush for his life.

“I reckon it’s like going to sleep when you are pretty well tired out,
and waking to find a summer day with the scent of hay coming in at the
window. I used to thank God for such mornings way back in the
Blue-Grass country, and I guess I’ll thank Him when I wake up on the
other side of Jordan.”

Next day he was much more cheerful, and read the life of Stonewall
Jackson much of the time. I went out to dinner with a mining engineer I
had got to see on business, and came back about half-past ten in time
for our game of chess before turning in.

I had a cigar in my mouth, I remember, as I pushed open the
smoking-room door. The lights were not lit, which struck me as odd. I
wondered if Scudder had turned in already.

I snapped the switch, but there was nobody there. Then I saw something
in the far corner which made me drop my cigar and fall into a cold
sweat.

My guest was lying sprawled on his back. There was a long knife through
his heart which skewered him to the floor.

Chapter II.
The Milkman Sets Out on his Travels


I sat down in an armchair and felt very sick. That lasted for maybe
five minutes, and was succeeded by a fit of the horrors. The poor
staring white face on the floor was more than I could bear, and I
managed to get a table-cloth and cover it. Then I staggered to a
cupboard, found the brandy and swallowed several mouthfuls. I had seen
men die violently before; indeed I had killed a few myself in the
Matabele War; but this cold-blooded indoor business was different.
Still I managed to pull myself together. I looked at my watch, and saw
that it was half-past ten.

An idea seized me, and I went over the flat with a small-tooth comb.
There was nobody there, nor any trace of anybody, but I shuttered and
bolted all the windows and put the chain on the door. By this time my
wits were coming back to me, and I could think again. It took me about
an hour to figure the thing out, and I did not hurry, for, unless the
murderer came back, I had till about six o’clock in the morning for my
cogitations.

I was in the soup—that was pretty clear. Any shadow of a doubt I might
have had about the truth of Scudder’s tale was now gone. The proof of
it was lying under the table-cloth. The men who knew that he knew what
he knew had found him, and had taken the best way to make certain of
his silence. Yes; but he had been in my rooms four days, and his
enemies must have reckoned that he had confided in me. So I would be
the next to go. It might be that very night, or next day, or the day
after, but my number was up all right.

Then suddenly I thought of another probability. Supposing I went out
now and called in the police, or went to bed and let Paddock find the
body and call them in the morning. What kind of a story was I to tell
about Scudder? I had lied to Paddock about him, and the whole thing
looked desperately fishy. If I made a clean breast of it and told the
police everything he had told me, they would simply laugh at me. The
odds were a thousand to one that I would be charged with the murder,
and the circumstantial evidence was strong enough to hang me. Few
people knew me in England; I had no real pal who could come forward and
swear to my character. Perhaps that was what those secret enemies were
playing for. They were clever enough for anything, and an English
prison was as good a way of getting rid of me till after June 15th as a
knife in my chest.

Besides, if I told the whole story, and by any miracle was believed, I
would be playing their game. Karolides would stay at home, which was
what they wanted. Somehow or other the sight of Scudder’s dead face had
made me a passionate believer in his scheme. He was gone, but he had
taken me into his confidence, and I was pretty well bound to carry on
his work.

You may think this ridiculous for a man in danger of his life, but that
was the way I looked at it. I am an ordinary sort of fellow, not braver
than other people, but I hate to see a good man downed, and that long
knife would not be the end of Scudder if I could play the game in his
place.

It took me an hour or two to think this out, and by that time I had
come to a decision. I must vanish somehow, and keep vanished till the
end of the second week in June. Then I must somehow find a way to get
in touch with the Government people and tell them what Scudder had told
me. I wished to Heaven he had told me more, and that I had listened
more carefully to the little he had told me. I knew nothing but the
barest facts. There was a big risk that, even if I weathered the other
dangers, I would not be believed in the end. I must take my chance of
that, and hope that something might happen which would confirm my tale
in the eyes of the Government.

My first job was to keep going for the next three weeks. It was now the
24th day of May, and that meant twenty days of hiding before I could
venture to approach the powers that be. I reckoned that two sets of
people would be looking for me—Scudder’s enemies to put me out of
existence, and the police, who would want me for Scudder’s murder. It
was going to be a giddy hunt, and it was queer how the prospect
comforted me. I had been slack so long that almost any chance of
activity was welcome. When I had to sit alone with that corpse and wait
on Fortune I was no better than a crushed worm, but if my neck’s safety
was to hang on my own wits I was prepared to be cheerful about it.

My next thought was whether Scudder had any papers about him to give me
a better clue to the business. I drew back the table-cloth and searched
his pockets, for I had no longer any shrinking from the body. The face
was wonderfully calm for a man who had been struck down in a moment.
There was nothing in the breast-pocket, and only a few loose coins and
a cigar-holder in the waistcoat. The trousers held a little penknife
and some silver, and the side pocket of his jacket contained an old
crocodile-skin cigar-case. There was no sign of the little black book
in which I had seen him making notes. That had no doubt been taken by
his murderer.

But as I looked up from my task I saw that some drawers had been pulled
out in the writing-table. Scudder would never have left them in that
state, for he was the tidiest of mortals. Someone must have been
searching for something—perhaps for the pocket-book.

I went round the flat and found that everything had been ransacked—the
inside of books, drawers, cupboards, boxes, even the pockets of the
clothes in my wardrobe, and the sideboard in the dining-room. There was
no trace of the book. Most likely the enemy had found it, but they had
not found it on Scudder’s body.

Then I got out an atlas and looked at a big map of the British Isles.
My notion was to get off to some wild district, where my veldcraft
would be of some use to me, for I would be like a trapped rat in a
city. I considered that Scotland would be best, for my people were
Scotch and I could pass anywhere as an ordinary Scotsman. I had half an
idea at first to be a German tourist, for my father had had German
partners, and I had been brought up to speak the tongue pretty
fluently, not to mention having put in three years prospecting for
copper in German Damaraland. But I calculated that it would be less
conspicuous to be a Scot, and less in a line with what the police might
know of my past. I fixed on Galloway as the best place to go. It was
the nearest wild part of Scotland, so far as I could figure it out, and
from the look of the map was not over thick with population.

A search in Bradshaw informed me that a train left St Pancras at 7.10,
which would land me at any Galloway station in the late afternoon. That
was well enough, but a more important matter was how I was to make my
way to St Pancras, for I was pretty certain that Scudder’s friends
would be watching outside. This puzzled me for a bit; then I had an
inspiration, on which I went to bed and slept for two troubled hours.

I got up at four and opened my bedroom shutters. The faint light of a
fine summer morning was flooding the skies, and the sparrows had begun
to chatter. I had a great revulsion of feeling, and felt a
God-forgotten fool. My inclination was to let things slide, and trust
to the British police taking a reasonable view of my case. But as I
reviewed the situation I could find no arguments to bring against my
decision of the previous night, so with a wry mouth I resolved to go on
with my plan. I was not feeling in any particular funk; only
disinclined to go looking for trouble, if you understand me.

I hunted out a well-used tweed suit, a pair of strong nailed boots, and
a flannel shirt with a collar. Into my pockets I stuffed a spare shirt,
a cloth cap, some handkerchiefs, and a tooth-brush. I had drawn a good
sum in gold from the bank two days before, in case Scudder should want
money, and I took fifty pounds of it in sovereigns in a belt which I
had brought back from Rhodesia. That was about all I wanted. Then I had
a bath, and cut my moustache, which was long and drooping, into a short
stubbly fringe.

Now came the next step. Paddock used to arrive punctually at 7.30 and
let himself in with a latch-key. But about twenty minutes to seven, as
I knew from bitter experience, the milkman turned up with a great
clatter of cans, and deposited my share outside my door. I had seen
that milkman sometimes when I had gone out for an early ride. He was a
young man about my own height, with an ill-nourished moustache, and he
wore a white overall. On him I staked all my chances.

I went into the darkened smoking-room where the rays of morning light
were beginning to creep through the shutters. There I breakfasted off a
whisky-and-soda and some biscuits from the cupboard. By this time it
was getting on for six o’clock. I put a pipe in my pocket and filled my
pouch from the tobacco jar on the table by the fireplace.

As I poked into the tobacco my fingers touched something hard, and I
drew out Scudder’s little black pocket-book....

That seemed to me a good omen. I lifted the cloth from the body and was
amazed at the peace and dignity of the dead face. “Goodbye, old chap,”
I said; “I am going to do my best for you. Wish me well, wherever you
are.”

Then I hung about in the hall waiting for the milkman. That was the
worst part of the business, for I was fairly choking to get out of
doors. Six-thirty passed, then six-forty, but still he did not come.
The fool had chosen this day of all days to be late.

At one minute after the quarter to seven I heard the rattle of the cans
outside. I opened the front door, and there was my man, singling out my
cans from a bunch he carried and whistling through his teeth. He jumped
a bit at the sight of me.

“Come in here a moment,” I said. “I want a word with you.” And I led
him into the dining-room.

“I reckon you’re a bit of a sportsman,” I said, “and I want you to do
me a service. Lend me your cap and overall for ten minutes, and here’s
a sovereign for you.”

His eyes opened at the sight of the gold, and he grinned broadly.
“Wot’s the gyme?”he asked.

“A bet,” I said. “I haven’t time to explain, but to win it I’ve got to
be a milkman for the next ten minutes. All you’ve got to do is to stay
here till I come back. You’ll be a bit late, but nobody will complain,
and you’ll have that quid for yourself.”

“Right-o!” he said cheerily. “I ain’t the man to spoil a bit of sport.
’Ere’s the rig, guv’nor.”

I stuck on his flat blue hat and his white overall, picked up the cans,
banged my door, and went whistling downstairs. The porter at the foot
told me to shut my jaw, which sounded as if my make-up was adequate.

At first I thought there was nobody in the street. Then I caught sight
of a policeman a hundred yards down, and a loafer shuffling past on the
other side. Some impulse made me raise my eyes to the house opposite,
and there at a first-floor window was a face. As the loafer passed he
looked up, and I fancied a signal was exchanged.

I crossed the street, whistling gaily and imitating the jaunty swing of
the milkman. Then I took the first side street, and went up a left-hand
turning which led past a bit of vacant ground. There was no one in the
little street, so I dropped the milk-cans inside the hoarding and sent
the cap and overall after them. I had only just put on my cloth cap
when a postman came round the corner. I gave him good morning and he
answered me unsuspiciously. At the moment the clock of a neighbouring
church struck the hour of seven.

There was not a second to spare. As soon as I got to Euston Road I took
to my heels and ran. The clock at Euston Station showed five minutes
past the hour. At St Pancras I had no time to take a ticket, let alone
that I had not settled upon my destination. A porter told me the
platform, and as I entered it I saw the train already in motion. Two
station officials blocked the way, but I dodged them and clambered into
the last carriage.

Three minutes later, as we were roaring through the northern tunnels,
an irate guard interviewed me. He wrote out for me a ticket to
Newton-Stewart, a name which had suddenly come back to my memory, and
he conducted me from the first-class compartment where I had ensconced
myself to a third-class smoker, occupied by a sailor and a stout woman
with a child. He went off grumbling, and as I mopped my brow I observed
to my companions in my broadest Scots that it was a sore job catching
trains. I had already entered upon my part.

“The impidence o’ that gyaird!” said the lady bitterly. “He needit a
Scotch tongue to pit him in his place. He was complainin’ o’ this wean
no haein’ a ticket and her no fower till August twalmonth, and he was
objectin’ to this gentleman spittin’.”

The sailor morosely agreed, and I started my new life in an atmosphere
of protest against authority. I reminded myself that a week ago I had
been finding the world dull.

Chapter III.
The Adventure of the Literary Innkeeper


I had a solemn time travelling north that day. It was fine May weather,
with the hawthorn flowering on every hedge, and I asked myself why,
when I was still a free man, I had stayed on in London and not got the
good of this heavenly country. I didn’t dare face the restaurant car,
but I got a luncheon-basket at Leeds and shared it with the fat woman.
Also I got the morning’s papers, with news about starters for the Derby
and the beginning of the cricket season, and some paragraphs about how
Balkan affairs were settling down and a British squadron was going to
Kiel.

When I had done with them I got out Scudder’s little black pocket-book
and studied it. It was pretty well filled with jottings, chiefly
figures, though now and then a name was printed in. For example, I
found the words “Hofgaard”, “Luneville”, and “Avocado” pretty often,
and especially the word “Pavia”.

Now I was certain that Scudder never did anything without a reason, and
I was pretty sure that there was a cypher in all this. That is a
subject which has always interested me, and I did a bit at it myself
once as intelligence officer at Delagoa Bay during the Boer War. I have
a head for things like chess and puzzles, and I used to reckon myself
pretty good at finding out cyphers. This one looked like the numerical
kind where sets of figures correspond to the letters of the alphabet,
but any fairly shrewd man can find the clue to that sort after an hour
or two’s work, and I didn’t think Scudder would have been content with
anything so easy. So I fastened on the printed words, for you can make
a pretty good numerical cypher if you have a key word which gives you
the sequence of the letters.

I tried for hours, but none of the words answered. Then I fell asleep
and woke at Dumfries just in time to bundle out and get into the slow
Galloway train. There was a man on the platform whose looks I didn’t
like, but he never glanced at me, and when I caught sight of myself in
the mirror of an automatic machine I didn’t wonder. With my brown face,
my old tweeds, and my slouch, I was the very model of one of the hill
farmers who were crowding into the third-class carriages.

I travelled with half a dozen in an atmosphere of shag and clay pipes.
They had come from the weekly market, and their mouths were full of
prices. I heard accounts of how the lambing had gone up the Cairn and
the Deuch and a dozen other mysterious waters. Above half the men had
lunched heavily and were highly flavoured with whisky, so they took no
notice of me. We rumbled slowly into a land of little wooded glens and
then to a great wide moorland place, gleaming with lochs, with high
blue hills showing northwards.

About five o’clock the carriage had emptied, and I was left alone as I
had hoped. I got out at the next station, a little place whose name I
scarcely noted, set right in the heart of a bog. It reminded me of one
of those forgotten little stations in the Karroo. An old station-master
was digging in his garden, and with his spade over his shoulder
sauntered to the train, took charge of a parcel, and went back to his
potatoes. A child of ten received my ticket, and I emerged on a white
road that straggled over the brown moor.

It was a gorgeous spring evening, with every hill showing as clear as a
cut amethyst. The air had the queer, rooty smell of bogs, but it was as
fresh as mid-ocean, and it had the strangest effect on my spirits. I
actually felt light-hearted. I might have been a boy out for a spring
holiday tramp, instead of a man of thirty-seven very much wanted by the
police. I felt just as I used to feel when I was starting for a big
trek on a frosty morning on the high veld. If you believe me, I swung
along that road whistling. There was no plan of campaign in my head,
only just to go on and on in this blessed, honest-smelling hill
country, for every mile put me in better humour with myself.

In a roadside planting I cut a walking-stick of hazel, and presently
struck off the highway up a by-path which followed the glen of a
brawling stream. I reckoned that I was still far ahead of any pursuit,
and for that night might please myself. It was some hours since I had
tasted food, and I was getting very hungry when I came to a herd’s
cottage set in a nook beside a waterfall. A brown-faced woman was
standing by the door, and greeted me with the kindly shyness of
moorland places. When I asked for a night’s lodging she said I was
welcome to the “bed in the loft”, and very soon she set before me a
hearty meal of ham and eggs, scones, and thick sweet milk.

At the darkening her man came in from the hills, a lean giant, who in
one step covered as much ground as three paces of ordinary mortals.
They asked me no questions, for they had the perfect breeding of all
dwellers in the wilds, but I could see they set me down as a kind of
dealer, and I took some trouble to confirm their view. I spoke a lot
about cattle, of which my host knew little, and I picked up from him a
good deal about the local Galloway markets, which I tucked away in my
memory for future use. At ten I was nodding in my chair, and the “bed
in the loft” received a weary man who never opened his eyes till five
o’clock set the little homestead a-going once more.

They refused any payment, and by six I had breakfasted and was striding
southwards again. My notion was to return to the railway line a station
or two farther on than the place where I had alighted yesterday and to
double back. I reckoned that that was the safest way, for the police
would naturally assume that I was always making farther from London in
the direction of some western port. I thought I had still a good bit of
a start, for, as I reasoned, it would take some hours to fix the blame
on me, and several more to identify the fellow who got on board the
train at St Pancras.

It was the same jolly, clear spring weather, and I simply could not
contrive to feel careworn. Indeed I was in better spirits than I had
been for months. Over a long ridge of moorland I took my road, skirting
the side of a high hill which the herd had called Cairnsmore of Fleet.
Nesting curlews and plovers were crying everywhere, and the links of
green pasture by the streams were dotted with young lambs. All the
slackness of the past months was slipping from my bones, and I stepped
out like a four-year-old. By-and-by I came to a swell of moorland which
dipped to the vale of a little river, and a mile away in the heather I
saw the smoke of a train.

The station, when I reached it, proved to be ideal for my purpose. The
moor surged up around it and left room only for the single line, the
slender siding, a waiting-room, an office, the station-master’s
cottage, and a tiny yard of gooseberries and sweet-william. There
seemed no road to it from anywhere, and to increase the desolation the
waves of a tarn lapped on their grey granite beach half a mile away. I
waited in the deep heather till I saw the smoke of an east-going train
on the horizon. Then I approached the tiny booking-office and took a
ticket for Dumfries.

The only occupants of the carriage were an old shepherd and his dog—a
wall-eyed brute that I mistrusted. The man was asleep, and on the
cushions beside him was that morning’s _Scotsman_. Eagerly I seized on
it, for I fancied it would tell me something.

There were two columns about the Portland Place Murder, as it was
called. My man Paddock had given the alarm and had the milkman
arrested. Poor devil, it looked as if the latter had earned his
sovereign hardly; but for me he had been cheap at the price, for he
seemed to have occupied the police for the better part of the day. In
the latest news I found a further instalment of the story. The milkman
had been released, I read, and the true criminal, about whose identity
the police were reticent, was believed to have got away from London by
one of the northern lines. There was a short note about me as the owner
of the flat. I guessed the police had stuck that in, as a clumsy
contrivance to persuade me that I was unsuspected.

There was nothing else in the paper, nothing about foreign politics or
Karolides, or the things that had interested Scudder. I laid it down,
and found that we were approaching the station at which I had got out
yesterday. The potato-digging station-master had been gingered up into
some activity, for the west-going train was waiting to let us pass, and
from it had descended three men who were asking him questions. I
supposed that they were the local police, who had been stirred up by
Scotland Yard, and had traced me as far as this one-horse siding.
Sitting well back in the shadow I watched them carefully. One of them
had a book, and took down notes. The old potato-digger seemed to have
turned peevish, but the child who had collected my ticket was talking
volubly. All the party looked out across the moor where the white road
departed. I hoped they were going to take up my tracks there.

As we moved away from that station my companion woke up. He fixed me
with a wandering glance, kicked his dog viciously, and inquired where
he was. Clearly he was very drunk.

“That’s what comes o’ bein’ a teetotaller,” he observed in bitter
regret.

I expressed my surprise that in him I should have met a blue-ribbon
stalwart.

“Ay, but I’m a strong teetotaller,” he said pugnaciously. “I took the
pledge last Martinmas, and I havena touched a drop o’ whisky sinsyne.
Not even at Hogmanay, though I was sair temptit.”

He swung his heels up on the seat, and burrowed a frowsy head into the
cushions.

“And that’s a’ I get,” he moaned. “A heid better than hell fire, and
twae een lookin’ different ways for the Sabbath.”

“What did it?” I asked.

“A drink they ca’ brandy. Bein’ a teetotaller I keepit off the whisky,
but I was nip-nippin’ a’ day at this brandy, and I doubt I’ll no be
weel for a fortnicht.” His voice died away into a splutter, and sleep
once more laid its heavy hand on him.

My plan had been to get out at some station down the line, but the
train suddenly gave me a better chance, for it came to a standstill at
the end of a culvert which spanned a brawling porter-coloured river. I
looked out and saw that every carriage window was closed and no human
figure appeared in the landscape. So I opened the door, and dropped
quickly into the tangle of hazels which edged the line.

It would have been all right but for that infernal dog. Under the
impression that I was decamping with its master’s belongings, it
started to bark, and all but got me by the trousers. This woke up the
herd, who stood bawling at the carriage door in the belief that I had
committed suicide. I crawled through the thicket, reached the edge of
the stream, and in cover of the bushes put a hundred yards or so behind
me. Then from my shelter I peered back, and saw the guard and several
passengers gathered round the open carriage door and staring in my
direction. I could not have made a more public departure if I had left
with a bugler and a brass band.

Happily the drunken herd provided a diversion. He and his dog, which
was attached by a rope to his waist, suddenly cascaded out of the
carriage, landed on their heads on the track, and rolled some way down
the bank towards the water. In the rescue which followed the dog bit
somebody, for I could hear the sound of hard swearing. Presently they
had forgotten me, and when after a quarter of a mile’s crawl I ventured
to look back, the train had started again and was vanishing in the
cutting.

I was in a wide semicircle of moorland, with the brown river as radius,
and the high hills forming the northern circumference. There was not a
sign or sound of a human being, only the plashing water and the
interminable crying of curlews. Yet, oddly enough, for the first time I
felt the terror of the hunted on me. It was not the police that I
thought of, but the other folk, who knew that I knew Scudder’s secret
and dared not let me live. I was certain that they would pursue me with
a keenness and vigilance unknown to the British law, and that once
their grip closed on me I should find no mercy.

I looked back, but there was nothing in the landscape. The sun glinted
on the metals of the line and the wet stones in the stream, and you
could not have found a more peaceful sight in the world. Nevertheless I
started to run. Crouching low in the runnels of the bog, I ran till the
sweat blinded my eyes. The mood did not leave me till I had reached the
rim of mountain and flung myself panting on a ridge high above the
young waters of the brown river.

From my vantage-ground I could scan the whole moor right away to the
railway line and to the south of it where green fields took the place
of heather. I have eyes like a hawk, but I could see nothing moving in
the whole countryside. Then I looked east beyond the ridge and saw a
new kind of landscape—shallow green valleys with plentiful fir
plantations and the faint lines of dust which spoke of highroads. Last
of all I looked into the blue May sky, and there I saw that which set
my pulses racing....

Low down in the south a monoplane was climbing into the heavens. I was
as certain as if I had been told that that aeroplane was looking for
me, and that it did not belong to the police. For an hour or two I
watched it from a pit of heather. It flew low along the hill-tops, and
then in narrow circles over the valley up which I had come. Then it
seemed to change its mind, rose to a great height, and flew away back
to the south.

I did not like this espionage from the air, and I began to think less
well of the countryside I had chosen for a refuge. These heather hills
were no sort of cover if my enemies were in the sky, and I must find a
different kind of sanctuary. I looked with more satisfaction to the
green country beyond the ridge, for there I should find woods and stone
houses.

About six in the evening I came out of the moorland to a white ribbon
of road which wound up the narrow vale of a lowland stream. As I
followed it, fields gave place to bent, the glen became a plateau, and
presently I had reached a kind of pass where a solitary house smoked in
the twilight. The road swung over a bridge, and leaning on the parapet
was a young man.

He was smoking a long clay pipe and studying the water with spectacled
eyes. In his left hand was a small book with a finger marking the
place. Slowly he repeated—

As when a Gryphon through the wilderness
With wingèd step, o’er hill and moory dale
Pursues the Arimaspian.


He jumped round as my step rung on the keystone, and I saw a pleasant
sunburnt boyish face.

“Good evening to you,” he said gravely. “It’s a fine night for the
road.”

The smell of peat smoke and of some savoury roast floated to me from
the house.

“Is that place an inn?” I asked.

“At your service,” he said politely. “I am the landlord, sir, and I
hope you will stay the night, for to tell you the truth I have had no
company for a week.”

I pulled myself up on the parapet of the bridge and filled my pipe. I
began to detect an ally.

“You’re young to be an innkeeper,” I said.

“My father died a year ago and left me the business. I live there with
my grandmother. It’s a slow job for a young man, and it wasn’t my
choice of profession.”

“Which was?”

He actually blushed. “I want to write books,” he said.

“And what better chance could you ask?” I cried. “Man, I’ve often
thought that an innkeeper would make the best story-teller in the
world.”

“Not now,” he said eagerly. “Maybe in the old days when you had
pilgrims and ballad-makers and highwaymen and mail-coaches on the road.
But not now. Nothing comes here but motor-cars full of fat women, who
stop for lunch, and a fisherman or two in the spring, and the shooting
tenants in August. There is not much material to be got out of that. I
want to see life, to travel the world, and write things like Kipling
and Conrad. But the most I’ve done yet is to get some verses printed in
_Chambers’s Journal_.”

I looked at the inn standing golden in the sunset against the brown
hills.

“I’ve knocked a bit about the world, and I wouldn’t despise such a
hermitage. D’you think that adventure is found only in the tropics or
among gentry in red shirts? Maybe you’re rubbing shoulders with it at
this moment.”

“That’s what Kipling says,” he said, his eyes brightening, and he
quoted some verse about “Romance brings up the 9.15.”

“Here’s a true tale for you then,” I cried, “and a month from now you
can make a novel out of it.”

Sitting on the bridge in the soft May gloaming I pitched him a lovely
yarn. It was true in essentials, too, though I altered the minor
details. I made out that I was a mining magnate from Kimberley, who had
had a lot of trouble with I.D.B. and had shown up a gang. They had
pursued me across the ocean, and had killed my best friend, and were
now on my tracks.

I told the story well, though I say it who shouldn’t. I pictured a
flight across the Kalahari to German Africa, the crackling, parching
days, the wonderful blue-velvet nights. I described an attack on my
life on the voyage home, and I made a really horrid affair of the
Portland Place murder. “You’re looking for adventure,” I cried; “well,
you’ve found it here. The devils are after me, and the police are after
them. It’s a race that I mean to win.”

“By God!” he whispered, drawing his breath in sharply, “it is all pure
Rider Haggard and Conan Doyle.”

“You believe me,” I said gratefully.

“Of course I do,” and he held out his hand. “I believe everything out
of the common. The only thing to distrust is the normal.”

He was very young, but he was the man for my money.

“I think they’re off my track for the moment, but I must lie close for
a couple of days. Can you take me in?”

He caught my elbow in his eagerness and drew me towards the house. “You
can lie as snug here as if you were in a moss-hole. I’ll see that
nobody blabs, either. And you’ll give me some more material about your
adventures?”

As I entered the inn porch I heard from far off the beat of an engine.
There silhouetted against the dusky West was my friend, the monoplane.

He gave me a room at the back of the house, with a fine outlook over
the plateau, and he made me free of his own study, which was stacked
with cheap editions of his favourite authors. I never saw the
grandmother, so I guessed she was bedridden. An old woman called Margit
brought me my meals, and the innkeeper was around me at all hours. I
wanted some time to myself, so I invented a job for him. He had a motor
bicycle, and I sent him off next morning for the daily paper, which
usually arrived with the post in the late afternoon. I told him to keep
his eyes skinned, and make note of any strange figures he saw, keeping
a special sharp look-out for motors and aeroplanes. Then I sat down in
real earnest to Scudder’s note-book.

He came back at midday with the _Scotsman_. There was nothing in it,
except some further evidence of Paddock and the milkman, and a
repetition of yesterday’s statement that the murderer had gone North.
But there was a long article, reprinted from the _Times_, about
Karolides and the state of affairs in the Balkans, though there was no
mention of any visit to England. I got rid of the innkeeper for the
afternoon, for I was getting very warm in my search for the cypher.

As I told you, it was a numerical cypher, and by an elaborate system of
experiments I had pretty well discovered what were the nulls and stops.
The trouble was the key word, and when I thought of the odd million
words he might have used I felt pretty hopeless. But about three
o’clock I had a sudden inspiration.

The name Julia Czechenyi flashed across my memory. Scudder had said it
was the key to the Karolides business, and it occurred to me to try it
on his cypher.

It worked. The five letters of “Julia” gave me the position of the
vowels. A was J, the tenth letter of the alphabet, and so represented
by X in the cypher. E was U=XXI, and so on. “Czechenyi’ gave me the
numerals for the principal consonants. I scribbled that scheme on a bit
of paper and sat down to read Scudder’s pages.

In half an hour I was reading with a whitish face and fingers that
drummed on the table.

I glanced out of the window and saw a big touring-car coming up the
glen towards the inn. It drew up at the door, and there was the sound
of people alighting. There seemed to be two of them, men in aquascutums
and tweed caps.

Ten minutes later the innkeeper slipped into the room, his eyes bright
with excitement.

“There’s two chaps below looking for you,” he whispered. “They’re in
the dining-room having whiskies-and-sodas. They asked about you and
said they had hoped to meet you here. Oh! and they described you jolly
well, down to your boots and shirt. I told them you had been here last
night and had gone off on a motor bicycle this morning, and one of the
chaps swore like a navvy.”

I made him tell me what they looked like. One was a dark-eyed thin
fellow with bushy eyebrows, the other was always smiling and lisped in
his talk. Neither was any kind of foreigner; on this my young friend
was positive.

I took a bit of paper and wrote these words in German as if they were
part of a letter—

... “Black Stone. Scudder had got on to this, but he could not act for
a fortnight. I doubt if I can do any good now, especially as Karolides
is uncertain about his plans. But if Mr T. advises I will do the best
I....”


I manufactured it rather neatly, so that it looked like a loose page of
a private letter.

“Take this down and say it was found in my bedroom, and ask them to
return it to me if they overtake me.”

Three minutes later I heard the car begin to move, and peeping from
behind the curtain caught sight of the two figures. One was slim, the
other was sleek; that was the most I could make of my reconnaissance.

The innkeeper appeared in great excitement. “Your paper woke them up,”
he said gleefully. “The dark fellow went as white as death and cursed
like blazes, and the fat one whistled and looked ugly. They paid for
their drinks with half-a-sovereign and wouldn’t wait for change.”

“Now I’ll tell you what I want you to do,” I said. “Get on your bicycle
and go off to Newton-Stewart to the Chief Constable. Describe the two
men, and say you suspect them of having had something to do with the
London murder. You can invent reasons. The two will come back, never
fear. Not tonight, for they’ll follow me forty miles along the road,
but first thing tomorrow morning. Tell the police to be here bright and
early.”

He set off like a docile child, while I worked at Scudder’s notes. When
he came back we dined together, and in common decency I had to let him
pump me. I gave him a lot of stuff about lion hunts and the Matabele
War, thinking all the while what tame businesses these were compared to
this I was now engaged in! When he went to bed I sat up and finished
Scudder. I smoked in a chair till daylight, for I could not sleep.

About eight next morning I witnessed the arrival of two constables and
a sergeant. They put their car in a coach-house under the innkeeper’s
instructions, and entered the house. Twenty minutes later I saw from my
window a second car come across the plateau from the opposite
direction. It did not come up to the inn, but stopped two hundred yards
off in the shelter of a patch of wood. I noticed that its occupants
carefully reversed it before leaving it. A minute or two later I heard
their steps on the gravel outside the window.

My plan had been to lie hid in my bedroom, and see what happened. I had
a notion that, if I could bring the police and my other more dangerous
pursuers together, something might work out of it to my advantage. But
now I had a better idea. I scribbled a line of thanks to my host,
opened the window, and dropped quietly into a gooseberry bush.
Unobserved I crossed the dyke, crawled down the side of a tributary
burn, and won the highroad on the far side of the patch of trees. There
stood the car, very spick and span in the morning sunlight, but with
the dust on her which told of a long journey. I started her, jumped
into the chauffeur’s seat, and stole gently out on to the plateau.

Almost at once the road dipped so that I lost sight of the inn, but the
wind seemed to bring me the sound of angry voices.